## README FILE

## END-TO-END BASH SCRIPT FOR ANALYZING TARGETED EXOME SEQ DATA 
This project analyzes paired-end targeted exome sequencing data generated by Illumina platform. The sequencing was performed using custom gene panels. The workflow focuses on identifying and characterizing germline variants (SNPs and Indels) using the GATK Best Practices pipeline, followed by filtering and annotation to generate high-confidence variant calls within the targeted regions.

## Workflow Summary

1. **Quality Control**
   - Tool: `FastQC`, `Fastp`
   - Purpose: Assess base quality, GC content, adapter contamination and perform all-in-one preprocessing of raw reads.

2. **Read Alignment**
   - Tool: `BWA-MEM`
   - Align reads to the reference genome.

3. **Post-Alignment Processing**
   - Tools: `samtools`, `GATK MarkDuplicatesSpark`
   - Steps: Flag duplicated reads, remove them and convert SAM to BAM.

4. **Base Quality Score Recalibration (BQSR)**
   - Tool: `GATK BaseRecalibrator`, `GATK ApplyBQSR`
   - Recalibrate the base quality scores.

5. **Variant Calling**
   - Tool: `GATK HaplotypeCaller`
   - Restricted to targeted regions using the BED file.

6. **Variant Filtration**
   - Tool: `GATK SelectVariants`, `GATK VariantFiltration`
   - Select SNPs and Indels and further filter the VCF by applying hard filters.

7. **Variant Annotation**
   - Tools: `GATK VariantAnnotator`, `bcftools annotate`
   - Annotate variants with dbSNP IDs and gene names from BED file.
**Note**: Only selected result files and read samples are included in this repo due to the large size of other data files.

## Results
Some clinically significant variants observed within the samples include missense variants at MLH1 (rs2020873 [CHR3:37092025, C>T]), BRCA1 (rs1799966 [CHR17: 41223094, T>C], rs16942 [CHR17: 41244000, T>C], rs16941 [CHR17: 41244435, T>C]) and BRCA2 (rs144848 [CHR13: 32906729, A>C], rs169547 [CHR13: 32929387, T>C]) and synonymous variants at coding regions of BRCA2 (rs543304, [CHR13: 32912299, T>C], rs206076 [CHR13: 32915005, G>C]). 

## GATK SOURCES
- [About GATK Best Practices] (https://gatk.broadinstitute.org/hc/en-us/articles/360035894711-About-the-GATK-Best-Practices)
- [Data Pre-processing] (https://gatk.broadinstitute.org/hc/en-us/articles/360035535912-Data-pre-processing-for-variant-discovery)
- [Read Group] (https://gatk.broadinstitute.org/hc/en-us/articles/360035890671-Read-groups)
- [About BQSR] (https://gatk.broadinstitute.org/hc/en-us/articles/360035890531-Base-Quality-Score-Recalibration-BQSR)
- [HaplotypeCaller tool] (https://gatk.broadinstitute.org/hc/en-us/articles/360037225632-HaplotypeCaller)
- [VariantAnnotator tool] (https://gatk.broadinstitute.org/hc/en-us/articles/13832654601755-VariantAnnotator)










